# Switzerland Economic Analysis
## Introduction
Switzerland is a fascinating country with one of the highest levels of per capita GDP in the world, a stable independent currency, and robust economic trade (“Swiss Economy – Facts and Figures”). When considering Switzerland’s balance of payments, it is perhaps not surprising to learn that Switzerland held a current account surplus over the span of the 2005 to 2020 (see chart A1). This suggests that Switzerland has consistently been a net lender to the rest of the world, with national savings in excess of domestic investment for the past fifteen years (see chart A2). As domestic savings rises, there is less need for foreign financial capital to meet investment needs. However, as a small open economy, Switzerland is highly exposed to external disruptions (Thomas). Despite an average current account surplus of $48 trillion, there has been substantial fluctuations in this balance over the last two decades (see chart A1).
## Current Account, Financial Account, and Overall Balance
During 2008, the current account surplus dropped from $48 trillion to $9 trillion, the lowest balance in recent history (see chart A1). This decline in the current account balance after a sizable surplus accumulation is significant as it corresponds to the financial crisis of 2007–2008. The global crisis brought about enormous swings in international capital flows, accompanied by unprecedented volatility, and while Switzerland’s capital account deficit remained consistently around $3 trillion over 2005 to 2010, the country’s financial account experienced gradual deterioration during this period, from a surplus of $95 trillion in 2005 to a deficit of $48 trillion during 2009. This illustrates a decline in international ownership of assets, including such as direct investments, securities, and commodities. As the deterioration of the financial account indicates an outflow of foreign currency, we observe this event through a stark appreciation of the Swiss franc against the U.S. dollar, from a spot exchange rate depicting the lowest value of 0.8 USD/CHF in 2005 to a maximum of 1.13 USD/CHF in 2011 (see chart A3). This is outlined by the increase in Switzerland’s overall balance, which somewhat mirrors the shifts in the nominal exchange rate but with much greater magnitude. Another potential artifact of this crisis was a shift in the composition of the current account surplus, from primary income serving as the primary contributor in 2005 through 2006 to merchandise trade dominating the current account surplus from 2007 through 2020.
## Investment and Savings as Percentage of Gross Domestic Product
While Switzerland’s investment in percent of GDP remained relatively static from 2005 to 2020, we do observe a slight decline from 2005 to 2009, reaching the lowest value of 24.54% of GDP during 2005 from a maximum of 26.42% of GDP in 2009. Similarly, Switzerland experiences a decline in saving in percent of GDP, however this shift is far more evident, from a high of about 39.03% of GDP in 2006 to a low of 27.68% in 2008 (see chart A2). As a result of relatively consistent domestic investment in concert with a more empathic downturn in savings, Switzerland’s current account balance perfectly mirrors this decline in national saving. Moreover, given the static nature of domestic investment, Switzerland’s current account balance fluctuates in tandem with national savings throughout the entire duration of 2005 to 2020 (see chart A2).
## Exchange Rate Policy in Response to Currency and Sovereing Debt Crises        	
          Switzerland did not escape unscathed from the global financial crisis of 2007-2008, with national saving, domestic investment, and current accounts all experiencing notable deterioration, but fared better than most other countries who amassed considerable amounts of debt. The U.S. and the European Union, Switzerland's main economic partners, were hit the hardest by the crisis (Mombelli). Compounding this issue, the depreciation of the U.S. dollar and the outbreak of the crisis in the eurozone continued to send the value of Swiss franc skyward, culminating in a sharp increase in the price of export goods (see chart A3) (Mombelli).
In 2011, with the European sovereign debt crisis fast on the heels of the global financial crisis, the Swiss National Bank was compelled to introduce a minimum exchange rate threshold of CHF 1.2 for one euro. The adaptation of this exchange rate policy can be observed as the suspension in the appreciation of the Swiss franc during 2011, reaching the maximum spot exchange rate of 1.13 USD/CHF (see chart A3). The minimum exchange rate threshold in relation to the euro served as a helpful tool in restoring profit margins to export companies during the most sensitive periods of the crisis, with Switzerland’s merchandise trade balance experiencing consistent growth from 2011 to 2015 (Mombelli). However, this policy was not without changes to Switzerland’s balance of payments, with the county’s financial account deficit ballooning to $112 trillion in 2012 before rebounding to a surplus of $97 trillion in 2013. Faced with a strong franc and a narrow domestic market, specialization in high quality product and niche markets has long been the practice of Swiss companies (Mombelli). As demand for niche exports tends to be more price inelastic, specialization serves as an explanation as to why Switzerland was more insulated from deeper recession than other countries (Mombelli).
However, amid the eurozone debt crisis, a surge in demand for the franc once again put upward pressure on the Swiss franc. In confronting continued appreciation during 2011, enforcing the minimum exchange rate threshold with the euro, the Swiss National Bank vowed to use its power to print money and use that freshly printed money to buy “unlimited quantities” of foreign currency (Phillips). However, The SNB creating new francs and using them to purchase euros caused Switzerland’s currency holding to explode, and while the Federal Reserve in the U.S. was buying domestic government bonds which it could hold until maturity with strong assurance of repayment, the SNB acquired an amalgamation of currencies that could fluctuate in value, potentially exposing the bank to large losses (Phillips). Given that Switzerland keeps debt levels particularly low, purchasing domestic debt was not a viable option to target exchange rates. As a result of this sterilized intervention, with the bank’s foreign currency holdings growing to about 75% of GDP, the SNB decided to abandon the ceiling on the franc in 2015, catching the market off-guard and leading to deflation in 2015 (Phillips). Prior to establishing the minimum exchange rate threshold in 2011, the euro and Swiss franc were momentarily at parity for the first since the conception of the European single currency. Since the mitigation of Swiss franc appreciation was the result of this exchange rate policy, the franc was still overvalued, with Switzerland facing consequences such as reductions in tourist industry revenue and a decline in net exports during 2011 (Hausner & Simon).
## Conclusion
Despite being a small open economy highly exposed to external disruptions, Switzerland’s specialization in high quality product and niche markets has provided some insulation from severe recession. Switzerland’s balance of payments are elucidating in revealing the impact of global and neighboring economic crises, illustrating how capital flows and exchange rate fluctuate with different conditions and policies. A particularly intriguing relationship exists between the Swiss franc and perpetual upward pressure resulting from continued current account surplus, with national savings moving in tandem with this current account surplus as a result of static domestic investment. However, since the abandonment of the  minimum exchange rate threshold of CHF 1.2 for one euro in 2015, Switzerland’s current surplus has experienced a sustained deterioration, declining from a surplus of $66 trillion in 2015 to a surplus of $20 trillion in 2020.
